README.md, before:

# PhipsBoot

⚠️ Work in progress. ⚠️

Disclaimer: _This project combines a lot of toolchain and binary knowledge and
experience I collected and gained in recent years about legacy x86_64 boot. The
main contribution IMHO is how the binary is assembled and that the thing boots
with all the properties described below, but not the high-level functionality
itself._

_Further: This is a rather niche use-case, especially in 2024._

PhipsBoot is a relocatable x86_64 bootloader for legacy boot written in Rust
and assembly. It is intended to be loaded by GRUB via Multiboot2, but also
supports Multiboot1 and XEN PVH entries. However, its main benefit comes out
when it is loaded by GRUB via Multiboot2 in legacy BIOS boot systems, where it
can be relocated in physical memory, although the kernel binary is a static ELF.

## TL;DR: What does PhipsBoot do?

It boots your x86_64 kernel in ELF format and performs the handoff in 64-bit
long mode. PhipsBoot abstracts a lot of boot-related x86_64 complexity away from
your kernel.

## About

### Why Relying On GRUB + Multiboot2?

[Effectively](https://phip1611.de/blog/x86-kernel-development-relocatable-binaries/),
in the open-source world you are limited to GRUB when you want to boot your
kernel on legacy BIOS x86_64 systems. To reuse all the abstractions and hidden
complexity that GRUB comes with, PhipsBoot can be much simpler and easier to
program, install, and use.

### Which problems does PhipsBoot solve?

It solves several problems every 64-bit kernel has to perform anyway, such as
performing the transition into 64-bit long mode while also being relocatable in
physical memory to never clash with firmware code, MMIO regions or otherwise
reserved addresses. Kernels using this bootloader can massively simplify their
build setup and boot code as much complexity is outsourced to PhipsBoot, such as
several CPU state transitions and intermediate identity page mappings.

By far the biggest contribution of PhipsBoot is that it is relocatable in
physical memory when it is loaded by GRUB. Here, you can read more of the
[overall challenges](https://phip1611.de/blog/x86-kernel-development-relocatable-binaries/).

All high-level logic is written in modern Rust.

### Related Projects

One can also write
an [entire legacy BIOS bootloader in Rust](https://github.com/rust-osdev/bootloader),
sure! That's awesome! However, installing legacy BIOS stage 1 bootloaders on
disk is much more complicated, as one has to patch the MBR instead of just
putting a file on disk. By using GRUB however, it is relatively easy to put
PhipsBoot or other Multiboot payloads on disk and reference them from the GRUB
config.

## Developer Guide

- General description about the architecture: [ARCHITECTURE.md](phipsboot/ARCHITECTURE.md)
- Build and run test: `$ make && make integration-test`

## User Guide

### Supported Kernel Payloads

Supported payloads that PhipsBoot can boot are ELF executables (static and dyn).
The hand-off to the kernel follows the PhipsBoot protocol.

### PhipsBoot protocol

This protocol describes the hardware state and the handover to your kernel when
it is booted by PhipsBoot.

#### Kernel Entry

The kernel entry is taken from the ELF entry. It is invoked using the SystemV
x86_64 calling convention. First argument passed to your kernel is a point to
the boot information.

#### Machine State after hand-off

- PhipsBoot is still mapped and occupies (at most) 2 MiB of virtual address
  space
- BSP in 64-bit long mode with 4-level paging
- APs are still asleep
- control registers
    - `%cr0`: PE (0), MP (1), WP (16), PG (31)
    - `%cr4`: PAE (5), OSFXSR (9), OSXMMEXCPT (10)
    - `%cr3`: holds the physical address of the root page table
- MSRs
    - `efer`: LME (8), NX (11)
- GDT, which is living in the physical address space of PhipsBoot, is set with
  two selectors:
    - null selector
    - (64-bit, code segment, ring 0)-selector
- `%rsp` is set to a valid 128 KiB stack
- `%rdi` has pointer to boot information
- All load segments of the kernel are loaded with their corresponding page-table
  rights. The NX bits are set for all non-executable LOAD segments.

#### Boot Information

TODO implement

### Booting Your Kernel with PhipsBoot

TODO implement

You can use the following GRUB configuration:

```
menuentry "Kernel" {
    multiboot2 /phipsboot
    module2 /your-kernel
    boot
}
```

#### Binary Formats of PhipsBoot

The build itself produces `phipsboot.elf32` and `phipsboot.elf64`. Both are
identical except for the ELF header. You usually always want to use the `.elf64`
version except for when booting it via Multiboot1, where compliant bootloaders
only accept 32-bit ELFs.

<!--
TODO
Furthermore, the build also produces a `.iso` variant that is bootable on
legacy BIOS systems. The `.iso` variant uses a GRUB standalone image that
chainloads PhipsBoot via Multiboot 2. GRUB2 will physically relocate PhipsBoot.
The `.iso` variant is used for testing and for you as inspiration for on how
you can package PhipsBoot along with your kernel.
-->

Commit message:

phipsboot: can now be booted via Xen PVH
This can be tested in Cloud Hypervisor, as cloud hypervisor supports direct kernel boot via Xen PVH:

cargo run --bin cloud-hypervisor -- --debug-console file=log.txt --kernel ./build/phipsboot.elf64

README.md, after:

# PhipsBoot

⚠️ Work in progress. ⚠️

Disclaimer: _This project combines a lot of toolchain and binary knowledge and
experience I collected and gained in recent years about legacy x86_64 boot. The
main contribution IMHO is how the binary is assembled and that the thing boots
with all the properties described below, but not the high-level functionality
itself._

_I am especially proud of the well-commented structure of the assembly files
and the linker script. I hope this can be a learning resource for others!_

_Further: This is a rather niche use-case, especially in 2024._

PhipsBoot is a relocatable x86_64 bootloader for legacy boot written in Rust
and assembly. It is intended to be loaded by GRUB via Multiboot2, but also
supports Multiboot1 and XEN PVH entries. However, its main benefit comes out
when it is loaded by GRUB via Multiboot2 in legacy BIOS boot systems, where it
can be relocated in physical memory, although the kernel binary is a static ELF.

## TL;DR: What does PhipsBoot do?

It boots your x86_64 kernel in ELF format and performs the handoff in 64-bit
long mode. PhipsBoot abstracts a lot of boot-related x86_64 complexity away from
your kernel.

## About

### Why Relying On GRUB + Multiboot2?

[Effectively](https://phip1611.de/blog/x86-kernel-development-relocatable-binaries/),
in the open-source world you are limited to GRUB when you want to boot your
kernel on legacy BIOS x86_64 systems. To reuse all the abstractions and hidden
complexity that GRUB comes with, PhipsBoot can be much simpler and easier to
program, install, and use.

### Which problems does PhipsBoot solve?

It solves several problems every 64-bit kernel has to perform anyway, such as
performing the transition into 64-bit long mode while also being relocatable in
physical memory to never clash with firmware code, MMIO regions or otherwise
reserved addresses. Kernels using this bootloader can massively simplify their
build setup and boot code as much complexity is outsourced to PhipsBoot, such as
several CPU state transitions and intermediate identity page mappings.

By far the biggest contribution of PhipsBoot is that it is relocatable in
physical memory when it is loaded by GRUB. Here, you can read more of the
[overall challenges](https://phip1611.de/blog/x86-kernel-development-relocatable-binaries/).

All high-level logic is written in modern Rust.

### Related Projects

One can also write
an [entire legacy BIOS bootloader in Rust](https://github.com/rust-osdev/bootloader),
sure! That's awesome! However, installing legacy BIOS stage 1 bootloaders on
disk is much more complicated, as one has to patch the MBR instead of just
putting a file on disk. By using GRUB however, it is relatively easy to put
PhipsBoot or other Multiboot payloads on disk and reference them from the GRUB
config.

## Developer Guide

- General description about the architecture: [ARCHITECTURE.md](phipsboot/ARCHITECTURE.md)
- Build and run test: `$ make && make integration-test`

Artifacts are in `./build`.

## User Guide

### Supported Kernel Payloads

Supported payloads that PhipsBoot can boot are ELF executables (static and dyn).
The hand-off to the kernel follows the PhipsBoot protocol.

### PhipsBoot protocol

This protocol describes the hardware state and the handover to your kernel when
it is booted by PhipsBoot.

#### Kernel Entry

The kernel entry is taken from the ELF entry. It is invoked using the SystemV
x86_64 calling convention. First argument passed to your kernel is a point to
the boot information.

#### Machine State after hand-off

- PhipsBoot is still mapped and occupies (at most) 2 MiB of virtual address
  space
- BSP in 64-bit long mode with 4-level paging
- APs are still asleep
- control registers
    - `%cr0`: PE (0), MP (1), WP (16), PG (31)
    - `%cr4`: PAE (5), OSFXSR (9), OSXMMEXCPT (10)
    - `%cr3`: holds the physical address of the root page table
- MSRs
    - `efer`: LME (8), NX (11)
- GDT, which is living in the physical address space of PhipsBoot, is set with
  two selectors:
    - null selector
    - (64-bit, code segment, ring 0)-selector
- `%rsp` is set to a valid 128 KiB stack
- `%rdi` has pointer to boot information
- All load segments of the kernel are loaded with their corresponding page-table
  rights. The NX bits are set for all non-executable LOAD segments.

#### Boot Information

TODO implement

### Booting Your Kernel with PhipsBoot

TODO implement

You can use the following GRUB configuration:

```
menuentry "Kernel" {
    multiboot2 /phipsboot
    module2 /your-kernel
    boot
}
```

#### Binary Formats of PhipsBoot

The build itself produces `phipsboot.elf32` and `phipsboot.elf64`. Both are
identical except for the ELF header. You usually always want to use the `.elf64`
version except for when booting it via Multiboot1, where compliant bootloaders
only accept 32-bit ELFs.

<!--
TODO
Furthermore, the build also produces a `.iso` variant that is bootable on
legacy BIOS systems. The `.iso` variant uses a GRUB standalone image that
chainloads PhipsBoot via Multiboot 2. GRUB2 will physically relocate PhipsBoot.
The `.iso` variant is used for testing and for you as inspiration for on how
you can package PhipsBoot along with your kernel.
-->
